# Title: Homepage - Operational AI Ethics

None

[ ](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/)

Operational AI Ethics

  * [Homepage](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/)
  * [Research](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/research/)
    * [Algorithmic explainability](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/research/explainability/)
    * [Algorithmic bias and fairness](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/research/algorithmic-bias-and-fairness/)
    * [AI and Public Interest](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/research/ai-and-public-interest/)
    * [Robustness and safety](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/research/robustness-and-safety/)
    * [Governance and regulation](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/research/governance-and-regulation/)
    * [Charting AI and AI ethics](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/research/charting-ai-and-ai-ethics/)
  * [Teaching](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/teaching/)
  * [Team](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/team/)

  * [AI Act Learning Hub](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/ai-act-learning-hub/)
  * [Resources](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/resources/)
  * [AI mondays](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/les-lundis-ia-et-finance/)
  * [News](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/news/)

[](javascript:;)

# Operational AI Ethics

Télécom Paris – Institut Polytechnique de Paris is one of the few institutions
in France with a true multidisciplinary team to address the emerging
challenges of artificial intelligence.

Our partners:

Cartoon credits: EvilAICartoons.com (Creative Commons license)

## Law, sociology, ethics, economics, computer science and HCI join forces  
to address challenges of “high risk” AI applications

« The Operational AI Ethics program allows us to deal with the subject of bias
and the explicability of algorithms in all its diversity, by bringing together
complementary expertise well beyond our respective disciplines. »  Stephan
Clémençon, professor in applied mathematics and machine learning at Télécom
Paris

Whether the problem relates to the emerging risks of Generative AI, or to more
routine risks linked to bias, explainability and robustness of classification
or recommendation systems, our research and teaching teams work together,
breaking down disciplinary silos to explore pragmatic solutions.

Under the European AI Act, cooperation across scientific disciplines is
indispensable. Data scientists cannot address bias and fundamental rights
risks alone, nor can lawyers and sociologists imagine solutions to AI risks
without involving computer and data scientists. Télécom Paris’s brings these
talents together, both in teaching and research. For each problem and use
case, we confront different disciplinary points of view.

This multidisciplinary approach requires getting beyond the big principles,
and into the operational realities of high-risk AI applications, understanding
safety and regulatory constraints specific to particular industries (finance,
public safety, health, public administration, energy, transport), and the
intricacies of human-machine interactions (HCI).

We prepare our students, whether PhD students or engineering graduates, to
collaborate in multidisciplinary environments focused on high-risk AI
applications, within public administrations, large enterprises, start-ups, or
regulators.

## An interdisciplinary team

AI Ethics involves computer science, philosophy, law, sociology, economics,
management and cognitive sciences.

[Read more](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/team/)

## The environmental impact of generative AI

Thomas Le Goff on the environmental impact of Generative AI

« The European AI Act does not directly address the environmental impact of AI
applications. »

## Human-centric AI

Astrid Bertrand, PhD candidate in Human-Computer Interactions

« Regarding human-AI collaboration, it seems that the objective of human-
centric AI is emerging as sufficiently clear and consensual for several
disciplines to feel concerned, therefore permitting a holistic reflection of
the problem. As the ambassador of human-centric design, HCI is obviously part
of the mix of the disciplines involved. The increasing number of contributions
on AI topics and the hype surrounding human-AI collaboration studies also
raise identity issues for the field. For instance, it is not always evident
how AI articles which mainly provide mathematical contributions and limited
user experiments, align with the conventional objectives and philosophy of
HCI. »

## Research

Our research projects explore the frontier between computer science approaches
to AI ethics and approaches developed in the social science, public policy and
regulatory arenas. With the help of PhD researchers, we present papers in
major international conferences on AI and society, and publish in peer-
reviewed journals. To review our main research initiatives

[Review our main research initiatives](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-
paris.fr/research/)

### [AI Act Learning Game More information
](https://www.canva.com/design/DAGF2FfogqE/QpjWW1ghhCr_GMZT_gLJ3A/view?utm_content=DAGF2FfogqE&utm_campaign=designshare&utm_medium=link&utm_source=editor)

## Teaching

Our teaching programs on AI ethics help engineering students understand
ethical and regulatory constraints on AI systems, and be in a position to
propose and defend operational solutions. We want our students to engage in
constructive problem-solving discussions with stakeholders in other
disciplines, including legal and compliance teams, product managers, senior
management, employee representatives and outside regulators such as data
protection authorities.

[See our teaching program](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-
paris.fr/teaching/)

## [News & publications](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/news/)

Publications, blogs and events of the team.

[](javascript:;)

[ News Confiance numérique, Enseignants-chercheurs AI and sustainability: a
paper by Thomas Le Goff at Dublin BILETA conference 30.04.2024 Read more
](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/2024/04/30/ai-and-
sustainability-a-paper-by-thomas-le-goff-at-dublin-bileta-conference/ "AI and
sustainability: a paper by Thomas Le Goff at Dublin BILETA conference")

[ News Confiance numérique, Enseignants-chercheurs [Ideas] Régulation de l’IA
et lutte contre la manipulation en ligne en période électorale 14.04.2024 Read
more  ](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/2024/04/14/ideas-
regulation-de-lia-et-lutte-contre-la-manipulation-en-ligne-en-periode-
electorale/ "\[Ideas\] Régulation de l’IA et lutte contre la manipulation en
ligne en période électorale")

[ News Confiance numérique, Enseignants-chercheurs [Ideas] IA générative :
empreinte et contribution environnementales du numérique 09.03.2024 Read more
](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/2024/03/09/ideas-ia-
generative-empreinte-et-contribution-environnementales-du-numerique/
"\[Ideas\] IA générative : empreinte et contribution environnementales du
numérique")

[ News Data science & IA Défense : «Le recrutement dans le secteur de l'IA est
un enjeu stratégique» (Libération) 09.03.2024 Read more
](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/2024/03/09/defense-le-
recrutement-dans-le-secteur-de-lia-est-un-enjeu-strategique-liberation/
"Défense : «Le recrutement dans le secteur de l'IA est un enjeu stratégique»
\(Libération\)")

[See more ](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/news/)

## Team & Partners

Follow us

[ ](https://fr.linkedin.com/school/telecom-paris/ "AI Ethics on LinkedIn") [
](https://x.com/TelecomParis "AI Ethics on Twitter")

© Télécom Paris 2024

  * [Credits](https://operational-ai-ethics.telecom-paris.fr/credits/)
  * [legal notice](https://www.telecom-paris.fr/fr/mentions-legales)

