# Title: UE MOB_0AT09_TP | Catalogue 2024-2025 | SynapseS

#  [ ](/catalogue/2024-2025) Enseignement ATHENS \- MOB_0AT09_TP : Social
Emergence in Complex Systems (Télécom Paris - Palaiseau)

## Domaine > Informatique.

[](/images/image_ue_2024_MOB_0AT09_TP.png)

## Descriptif

Prerequisites:

All lectures and all materials are in English, so we expect students to be
fluent in English. Lab work sessions are based on software written in Python.
Mastery of the Python language is not required, but students who attend this
course will be fluent in procedural object-oriented programming (Java, C++,
Python or equivalent). They will get some knowledge of Python by themselves
before the Athens week.

# Objectives

The existence of complex social organization is often a mystery. What would
bring individuals (people, social insects, birds, artificial agents...) to
favor collective benefit rather than short-term selfish payoff? This is the
"hard problem" of sociality: the return on investment in the collective is
divided by the size of the group, while selfish gains are retained in full.

The emergence of sociality is crucial, not only to understand animal and human
societies, but also to gain a new insight into many aspects of the digital
life (social media, open-source software communities, Internet technical
forums, cooperation among artificial agents, human-computer verbal
interaction, acceptability of AI).

This course will explore the conditions for stable social behavior. You will
be using computer simulations to study various phenomena (cooperation,
coordination, sharing, collective problem solving, communication, charity).
You will manipulate several theoretical models (including kin selection,
reciprocity and social signaling) that are used to explain these phenomena.

# Content

The course will cover several social phenomena, including: collective
decision, the cocktail party effect, scale-free social networks, the hawk-dove
dilemma, cooperation in insect societies, emergence of segregationism,
altruism, the "tragedy of the commons", the "green-beard" effect, social
coordination, suicide "for the group", honest communication, charity and
competitive helping.

Several theoretical models will be studied, including preferential attachment,
kin selection, the Prisoner’s dilemma, the handicap principle, social
signaling. Several of these models derive from applying Game Theory to social
dilemma.

Computer simulations will include genetic algorithms to simulate natural
evolution, and various basic multi-agent techniques to study collective
behavior.

# Audience

If you are curious about social phenomena and think that theoretical modeling
and computer simulation are powerful tools to approach them, then you will
enjoy the course.

# Prerequisites

All lectures and all materials are in English, so we expect students to be
fluent in English. Lab work sessions are based on software written in Python.
Mastery of the Python language is not required, but students who attend this
course will be fluent in some procedural object-oriented programming language
(Java, C++, Python or equivalent). They will get some knowledge of Python by
themselves before the Athens week.

# Validation

The course consists in lectures alternately with practical work on machines.
Students are asked to work on the software platform used to study social
phenomena and to perform slight modifications in one of the case studies to
develop their own personal (micro )project.

Students will be evaluated based on the following tasks:

  * Answers during Lab work sessions
  * Small open question quiz
  * A 5 min. presentation of their personal project
  * A short written description of their personal project (+ source files)

# Lecturers

Main lecturer: [Jean-Louis Dessalles](https://www.dessalles.fr/) \- Associate
professor at Telecom-Paris ([jean-louis.dessalles@telecom-
paris.fr](mailto:jean-louis.dessalles@telecom-paris.fr) )

Other lecturer: [Julien Lie-
Panis](http://www.institutnicod.org/membres/etudiant-e-s/doctorant-e-s/panis-
lie-julien/article/panis-lie-julien) \- final year PhD student at Telecom-
Paris and Institut Jean Nicod

# Categories:

Computer science, mathematics (game theory), theoretical sociology,
theoretical biology.

  * Informations générales
  * Pré-requis
  * Acquisition de l'UE
  * Descriptif & programme

30 heures en présentiel

### effectifs minimal / maximal:

10/30

### Diplôme(s) concerné(s)

  * [Echange international non diplomant](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/1/PEI-echange-international-non-diplomant)
  * [Programme d'Echange Européen ATHENS](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/2395/ATHENS-programme-d-echange-europeen-athens)
  * [Master M2 - Data & Artificial Intelligence](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/2083/M2DATAAI-master-m2-data-artificial-intelligence)
  * [Diplôme d'ingénieur](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/4/ING-diplome-d-ingenieur)
  * [Master M1 - Data and Artificial Intelligence](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/2490/M1DATAAI-master-m1-data-and-artificial-intelligence)

### Parcours de rattachement

  * [Cours complémentaires ouverts aux étudiants en programme d'échange non diplomant](/catalogue/2024-2025/parcours/4670/PEI-ADDITIONAL-cours-complementaires-ouverts-aux-etudiants-en-programme-d-echange-non-diplomant)
  * [Choix de cours dans le bloc Fully Optional Course](/catalogue/2024-2025/parcours/4656/CHOIX-FULLY-OPTIONAL-COURSES-choix-de-cours-dans-le-bloc-fully-optional-course)
  * [ATHENS Entrants - Formation courte](/catalogue/2024-2025/parcours/4678/ATHENS-FC-athens-entrants-formation-courte)

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Diplôme d'ingénieur

All lectures and all materials are in English, so we expect students to be
fluent in English. Lab work sessions are based on software written in Python.
Mastery of the Python language is not required, but students who attend this
course will be fluent in procedural object-oriented programming (Java, C++,
Python or equivalent). They will get some knowledge of Python by themselves
before the Athens week.

### Format des notes

Numérique sur 20

Littérale/grade réduit

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Master M2 - Data & Artificial Intelligence

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 3 ECTS

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Master M1 - Data and Artificial Intelligence

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 3 ECTS

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Programme d'Echange Européen ATHENS

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Echange international non diplomant

### Vos modalités d'acquisition :

4 évaluations :

TP notés

Projet

Soutenances

Quizz

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 3 ECTS

La note obtenue rentre dans le calcul de votre GPA.

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Diplôme d'ingénieur

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 3 ECTS
  * Crédit d'UE électives acquis : 3

La note obtenue rentre dans le calcul de votre GPA.

# responsables

Jean-Louis DESSALLES

Ada DIACONESCU

# coordinateurs des études

Sylvia ALVES DE SOUSA

# Equipe d'ingénierie pédagogique

Jean-Louis DESSALLES

Julien PANIS LIE

# programmation

## Emergence in complex systems, from Nature to engineering (Télécom
ParisTech) - Créneau semaine Athens

2024-2025 - Semaine Athens 1er semestre (du 18/11/24 au 22/11/24)

### Responsable :

Ada DIACONESCU

### Langues :

Anglais

### Effectifs min./max. :

10 / 12

###

E-mail

Catégorie

Site(s)

Téléphone

Téléphone

Entité de rattachement :

Libelle diplôme :

Niveau :

Site :

Fonction :

Programme d'échange :

Régime d'inscription :

