# Title: UE MOB_0AT44_TP | Catalogue 2024-2025 | SynapseS

#  [ ](/catalogue/2024-2025) Enseignement ATHENS \- MOB_0AT44_TP : Mediating
International and Scientific Communication

## Domaine > Sciences économiques et sociales.

## Descriptif

Prerequisites:

Participants must have an intermediate to good level of English to assure
comprehension and effective participation.

Objectives:

In this highly interactive course, learners will have the opportunity to
explore various mediation pathways for sharing and relaying their own cultural
experience and scientific knowledge. The first half of the course will cover a
range of popular and modern intercultural communication models that will be
used to foster collaborative interaction, encourage conceptual dialogue, and
facilitate a pluricultural space.

Then, in the second half of the course, learners will use these intercultural
foundations to gain hands-on experience showcasing their scientific work to
professional peers, the general public, as well as the media. Participants
will gain key takeaways for adapting one’s language to break down complex
information, facilitating communication in delicate situations, mediating Q&A
sessions, and adapting their message during media interviews.

This course also integrates our MOOC “Promote your Scientific Results” on
Coursera as pedagogical support material. Participants are able to access the
video content free of charge when registering for this online course.

Course exam:

Trainees in “pods” will take turns having the opportunity to be interviewed by
the “media” (fellow classmates). Interviewees will be evaluated by both their
peers as well as the course trainers using a clear evaluation grid. Tailored
feedback from the instructors will also be given.

  * Informations générales
  * Pré-requis
  * Acquisition de l'UE
  * Descriptif & programme

30 heures en présentiel (20 blocs ou créneaux)

### effectifs minimal / maximal:

10/30

### Diplôme(s) concerné(s)

  * [Programme d'Echange Européen ATHENS](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/2395/ATHENS-programme-d-echange-europeen-athens)
  * [Diplôme d'ingénieur](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/4/ING-diplome-d-ingenieur)

### Parcours de rattachement

  * [ATHENS Entrants - Formation courte](/catalogue/2024-2025/parcours/4678/ATHENS-FC-athens-entrants-formation-courte)

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Diplôme d'ingénieur

Participants must have an intermediate (B2) to good level of English to assure
comprehension and effective participation. Ideally, trainees should have
already watched all of the free-version videos (or are in the process of
watching them) from the MOOC on Coursera "Promote your Scientific Results"
which was published by the course instructors. Trainees are not required to
complete the paid version of the MOOC: https://www.coursera.org/learn/promote-
scientific-results

### Format des notes

Numérique sur 20

Littérale/grade réduit

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Programme d'Echange Européen ATHENS

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Diplôme d'ingénieur

### Vos modalités d'acquisition :

Course exam:

Trainees in “pods” will take turns having the opportunity to be interviewed by
the “media” (fellow classmates). They will be required to clearly present a
scientific area of their choice. Interviewees will be evaluated by both their
peers as well as the course trainers using a clear evaluation grid. Tailored
feedback from the instructors will also be given on the day of the exam.

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 3 ECTS
  * Crédit d'UE électives acquis : 3

La note obtenue rentre dans le calcul de votre GPA.

L'UE est évaluée par les étudiants.

### Programme détaillé

Day 1: A brief introduction of modern intercultural models, communication
styles, and one’s unique definition of losing face.  
  
Day 2: Intercultural implications for conflict management, high and low
context communication, the “Illusion of Transparency,” and their importance
for the scientific community.

Day 3: Scientific presentation training and fine-tuning.  
  
Day 4: Mediating questions and answers (Q&A) after scientific presentations.  
  
Day 5: Conducting and participating in media interviews. Training and
practice.

### Mots clés

International communication; Professional Communication; Scientific
presentations; Answering Questions; Scientific outreach

### Méthodes pédagogiques

Daily attendance and active participation is obligatory.

# responsables

Bethany CAGNOL

# coordinateurs des études

Sylvia ALVES DE SOUSA

# Equipe d'ingénierie pédagogique

Melania BURGELIS

# programmation

## Mediating International and Scientific Communication - Créneau semaine
Athens

2024-2025 - Semaine Athens 1er semestre (du 18/11/24 au 22/11/24)

### Responsable :

Bethany CAGNOL

### Langues :

Anglais

### Effectifs min./max. :

1 / 25

###

E-mail

Catégorie

Site(s)

Téléphone

Téléphone

Entité de rattachement :

Libelle diplôme :

Niveau :

Site :

Fonction :

Programme d'échange :

Régime d'inscription :

