# Title: UE CSC_4CS01_TP | Catalogue 2024-2025 | SynapseS

#  [ ](/catalogue/2024-2025) Enseignement scientifique & technique \-
CSC_4CS01_TP : Réseaux IP

## Domaine > Réseaux.

## Descriptif

IP Networks aims at introducing some advanced topic related to Computer
Networking.

The starting point is an overview of IPv6, the new version of the Internet
Protocol. The most important features of IPv6 are introduced. Particular
attention is paid to IPv6 addressing and how to create an addressing plan for
a network. The companion ICMPv6 protocol is also introduced, with a particular
focus on its extensions for Neighbor Discovery (replacement of the old Address
Resolution Protocol - ARP) and SLAAC (StateLess Address Auto-Configuration).
Because one of the main issues in the deployment of IPv6 is the transition
plan from IPv4, several transition techniques are studied (e.g., 6RD, NAT64,
etc.).

Intra-Domain routing is the second major topic of the course. This part starts
with a brief recap about intra-domain routing and the role of IGPs (Interior
Gateway Protocols). An in-depth look at OSPF (Open-Shortest Path First) is
then provided. First, the three main components of OSPF are illustrated,
namely the Hello Protocol, the Database Synchronisation, and Link-State
manipulation. Then, OSPF areas and ECMP (Equal-Cost Multi-Path) are explored.

The third major topic of the course is Inter-Domain Routing. As a start, the
Internet AS organization as long as the notion of valley-free routing are
introduced. Part of it is the analysis of the way different AS can have a
relationship, e.g., customer-provider and peering, and how this impact routing
and prefix advertisement. The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is then presented
with a strong emphasis on the notion of policy routing. An in-depth discussion
about the BGP decision process and how to perform Traffic Engineering by
tweaking the path attributes are presented.

All of the major topics are followed by a hands-on session in the lab, so to
have a direct first-hand experience of each of the proposed topics.

The course is concluded with a seminar. The seminar is hold by an invited
speaker from industrial partners. The topic depends on the guest, but usually
is on either some cutting-edge technology, or an overview of the work carried
out in the industry, or practical aspect of the life of a network engineer
(usually not written in any book). Attendance to the seminar is mandatory.

Attendance: Lab sessions are mandatory; Classes attendance is not mandatory.

Pre-Requirements: Familiarity with the Internet Architecture and the TCP/IP
Protocol Suite

  * Informations générales
  * Pré-requis
  * Acquisition de l'UE
  * Descriptif & programme

24 heures en présentiel (16 blocs ou créneaux)

réparties en:

  * Leçon :
  * Travaux Pratiques :
  * Travaux Dirigés :

### effectifs minimal / maximal:

8/40

### Diplôme(s) concerné(s)

  * [Echange international non diplomant](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/1/PEI-echange-international-non-diplomant)
  * [Expert cybersécurité des réseaux et des systèmes d'information](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/65/ECRSI-expert-cybersecurite-des-reseaux-et-des-systemes-d-information)
  * [Diplôme d'ingénieur](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/4/ING-diplome-d-ingenieur)

### Parcours de rattachement

  * [Filière Grandes Infrastructures Numériques (créneau A)](/catalogue/2024-2025/parcours/1402/GIN-filiere-grandes-infrastructures-numeriques-creneau-a)
  * [Filière Cybersécurité (créneau A)](/catalogue/2024-2025/parcours/1407/CYBER-filiere-cybersecurite-creneau-a)

### Format des notes

Numérique sur 20

Littérale/grade européen

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Echange international non diplomant

### Vos modalités d'acquisition :

Controle de connaissances écrit 1h30.

La présence en cours, en TD et en TP est obligatoire.

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 2.5 ECTS

La note obtenue rentre dans le calcul de votre GPA.

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Diplôme d'ingénieur

### Vos modalités d'acquisition :

Controle de connaissances écrit (1h30)

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 2.5 ECTS
  * Crédit d'UE électives acquis : 2.5

La note obtenue rentre dans le calcul de votre GPA.

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Expert cybersécurité des réseaux et des
systèmes d'information

### Vos modalités d'acquisition :

Controle de connaissances écrit 1h30

________

Rentre dans le calcul de la moyenne du BE1.

Conformément au règlement scolaire (art.3.3.2 page 6) : "Si l'étudiant obtient
une note de BE inférieure à 10, il peut passer un examen de rattrapage pour
toute ue de ce BE pour laquelle il a obtenu une note inférieure à 10".

Le rattrapage est autorisé (Max entre les deux notes)

  * le rattrapage peut être demandé par l'étudiant si :    Note initiale < 10

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 2 ECTS

Le coefficient de l'UE est : 2

La note obtenue rentre dans le calcul de votre GPA.

### Programme détaillé

# responsables

Leonardo LINGUAGLOSSA

Jean-Louis ROUGIER

# coordinateurs des études

Fabienne DUC-SEILLAN

# Equipe d'ingénierie pédagogique

Luigi IANNONE

Leonardo LINGUAGLOSSA

Jean-Louis ROUGIER

# programmation

## Réseaux IP - GIN-SR2I201 - S1P1 - A1 - A1

2024-2025 - 1er semestre période 1 (du 11/09/24 au 15/11/24)

### Responsable :

Jean-Louis ROUGIER

### Langues :

Français

###

E-mail

Catégorie

Site(s)

Téléphone

Téléphone

Entité de rattachement :

Libelle diplôme :

Niveau :

Site :

Fonction :

Programme d'échange :

Régime d'inscription :

