# Title: UE MOB_0AT20_TP | Catalogue 2024-2025 | SynapseS

#  [ ](/catalogue/2024-2025) Enseignement ATHENS \- MOB_0AT20_TP : From cloud
datacenters to mobile edge computing (MEC): architectures, innovative
services, and open challenges (Télécom Paris - Palaiseau)

## Domaine > Réseaux.

[](/images/image_ue_2024_MOB_0AT20_TP.png)

## Descriptif

OBJECTIVES OF THE COURSE:

The TPT20 course aims to outline the fundamental concepts, application domains
and open research topics inherent to Cloud computing, both in large
datacenters and in mobile edge environment. Mobile edge typically corresponds
to the periphery of radio-cellular networks where both fix users, mobile users
and IoT devices (sensors and actuators) are interconnected in wireless to
cooperate with remote computing units. These computing units are referred in
the jarrgon as the Baseband Units (BBU). The emergence of 5G/6G telephony and
of smart/autonomous vehicles is at the origin of the CLoud Radio Access
Network (CRAN) standard. An originality of this course is to provide a
sythnetic state of the art (SoA) in matter of harware/middleware/sofware
confiigurations. Teaching an ATHENS session is challenging on two aspects: how
to introduce a new scientific topic in a successive five days session, from
electronic chips evolution to real-time Virtual Machines managment ? How to
satisfy the expectations of an international audience with diverse scientific
backgrounds and cultures? The added-value of the TPT20 curriculum is two-fold.
First, it introduces some of the most significant and up-to-date evolutions of
Cloud computing but also of Mobile Edge Computing, in terms of hardware
architecture and service management. Secondly, it alternates didactic courses
with lab sessions thanks to a collaboration with two leading edge actors of
the domain, namely Nexedi and IBM. My colleagues Mr Steven Eychenne (Ing. @
IBM-France) and Mr Cédric LENINIVIN (Ing. @ Nexedi) both contribute to this
challenging task.

In a first step, we propose a brief state of the art on CPU and hardware
architectures. The performance criteria of a blade server (the basic computing
unit within a datacenter) are analyzed (CPU speed, multithread vs. multicore,
energy consumption etc.). We describe then into details the rationale of the
typical 2D-fat-tree optical backplane network architecture of a datacenter.
The pros and cons of this architecture are discussed in reference to the
potentialities of all-optical technologies. The basic rationale of virtual
machines (VM) assignment to physical machines (PM) and migration strategies is
presented via bin packing theory. After these preliminary considerations, the
evolution from hypervisors to Virtual Containers (VC) such as Kubernetes and
Docker is briefly discussed. An original focus is dedicated to the impact of
heat dissipation onto real-time VM migrations. In this perspective, we show
how a Pareto optimization approach can be considered. We conclude this first
section by a brief presentation of Cloud standardization bodies and the three
Cloud business models considered up to now.

The second part of this course deals with the most innovative aspect of the
Cloud domain, namely Cloud Radio Access Networks (CRAN) and Mobile Edge
Computing (MEC). CRAN refers to the innovative access infrastructure that will
enable to deport Cloud intelligence close to fix/mobile end-users, including
IoT sensors/actuators. Autonomous vehicles (AV) and more extensively,
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS), the first two pillar applications of
5G, rely on Cloud and IoT. In this perspective, we depict into details the
basic principles of Digital Radio-over-Fiber (D-RoF) and the two underlying
standards, namely CPRI and OBSAI. In our conclusion, we depict the open
perspectives offered by 5G/MEC for future intelligent transportation systems
(ITS).

  * Informations générales
  * Pré-requis
  * Acquisition de l'UE
  * Descriptif & programme

30 heures en présentiel (20 blocs ou créneaux)

10 heures de travail personnel estimé pour l’étudiant.

### effectifs minimal / maximal:

5/50

### Diplôme(s) concerné(s)

  * [Programme d'Echange Européen ATHENS](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/2395/ATHENS-programme-d-echange-europeen-athens)
  * [Diplôme d'ingénieur](/catalogue/2024-2025/diplome/4/ING-diplome-d-ingenieur)

### Parcours de rattachement

  * [ATHENS Entrants - Formation courte](/catalogue/2024-2025/parcours/4678/ATHENS-FC-athens-entrants-formation-courte)

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Diplôme d'ingénieur

B

### Format des notes

Numérique sur 20

Littérale/grade réduit

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Programme d'Echange Européen ATHENS

## Pour les étudiants du diplôme Diplôme d'ingénieur

### Vos modalités d'acquisition :

Travaux

L'UE est acquise si Note finale >= 10

  * Crédits ECTS acquis : 3 ECTS
  * Crédit d'UE électives acquis : 3

La note obtenue rentre dans le calcul de votre GPA.

### Programme détaillé

Day 1: Monday 14th of November 2022 - 9:30 – 10:30 AM

“Welcome address of the 2022-2023 ATHENS students", Amphitheater Thevenin

Prof. Jean-François NAVINER, head of international affairs (Telecom Paris),
Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Computer science and networks Dpt.)

Day 1 Monday 15th of November 2021 – 10:45 – 12:15 AM

“Hardware refresher: multicore and multithread processing, hardware/middleware
recent evolutions”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 1: Monday 15th of November 2021 - 13:30 – 15:00 PM

“Typical architecture of a datacenter”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 1 Monday 15th of November 2021 – 15:15 – 16:45 AM

“2D-bin packing for dynamic VMs assignment to PMs – Evaluation of the response
time of a datacenter”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 2: Tuesday 16th of November 2021 - 9:00 – 10:30 AM

“Software Defined Network for Cloud”

  1. Steven Eychenne (IBM - France)

Day 2 Tuesday 16th of November 2021 – 10:45 – 12:15 AM

“Software Defined Network for Cloud”

  1. Steven Eychenne (Nexedi -France)

Day 2: Tuesday 16th of November 2021 - 13:30 – 15:00 PM

“Network Function Virtualization for Cloud”

  1. Steven Eychenne (IBM-France) – Hands-on session

Day 2 Tuesday 16th of November 2021 – 15:15 – 16:45 AM

“Network Function Virtualization for Cloud”

  1. Steven Eychenne (IBM-France)

Day 3: Wednesday 17th of November 2021 - 9:00 – 10:30 AM

“Slap-OS: the Nexedi innovative approach of Cloud for SMEs ”

  1. Cédric LE NINIVIN (Nexedi)

Day 3 Wednesday 17th of November 2021 – 10:45 – 12:15 AM

“Slap-OS: the Nexedi innovative approach of Cloud for SMEs ”

  1. Cédric LE NINIVIN (Nexedi)”

Day 3 Wednesday 17th of November 2021 - 13:30 – 15:00 PM

“The Nexedi Cloud solutions for real-time power control of electric grid”

  1. Cédric LE NINIVIN (Nexedi)

Day 3 Wednesday 17th of November 2021 – 15:15 – 16:45 AM

“The Nexedi Cloud solutions for real-time power control of electric grid”

  1. Cédric LE NINIVIN (Nexedi)

Day 4: Thursday 18th of November 2021 - 9:00 – 10:30 AM

“Impact of temperature on Total Cost of Ownership of a datacenter”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 4: Thursday 18th of November 2021 – 10:45 – 12:15 AM

“Principles of VM migration – flash back to bin-packing theory”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 4: Thursday 18th of November 2021 - 13:30 – 15:00 PM

“Cloud standardization from NIST”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 4: Thursday 18th of November 2021 – 15:15 – 16:45 AM

“Pricing strategies for Cloud services”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 5: Friday 19th of November 2021 - 9:00 – 10:30 AM

“From traditional RAN to disaggregated RAN: The CPRI and OBSAI D-RoF
standards”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 5: Friday 19th of November 2021 – 10:45 – 12:15 AM

“The Open RAN standard – energy harvesting for future radio-mobile networks”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 5: Friday 19th of November 2021 - 13:30 – 15:00 PM

“Conclusion and evaluation of the session : open questions and answers”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

Day 5: Friday 19th of November 2021 – 15:15 – 16:45 AM

“Evaluation exam with all documents”

Prof. Maurice GAGNAIRE (Telecom Paris)

### Mots clés

, dissipation de chaleur, allocation de ressources de calcul et de stockage:
concepts delocal/global, réseaux optiques , réseaux radio-mobile 5G, pricing.

### Méthodes pédagogiques

Evaluation exam with all documents

# responsables

Maurice GAGNAIRE

# coordinateurs des études

Sylvia ALVES DE SOUSA

# Equipe d'ingénierie pédagogique

# programmation

## From Cloud datacenters to Mobile Edge Computing: architecture, dimensioning
and energy constraints - Créneau semaine Athens

2024-2025 - Semaine Athens 1er semestre (du 18/11/24 au 22/11/24)

### Responsable :

Maurice GAGNAIRE

### Langues :

Français

### Effectifs min./max. :

5 / 50

###

E-mail

Catégorie

Site(s)

Téléphone

Téléphone

Entité de rattachement :

Libelle diplôme :

Niveau :

Site :

Fonction :

Programme d'échange :

Régime d'inscription :

